{\rtf1\ansi\uc1\deff0\deflang1024
{\fonttbl{\f0\fnil\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}
{\f1\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f2\fnil\fcharset0 Arial;}
{\f3\fnil\fcharset0 Courier New;}
{\f4\fnil\fcharset0 Zapf Chancery;}
{\f5\fnil\fcharset0 STIXGeneral;}
{\f6\fnil\fcharset0 MS Gothic;}
}
{\colortbl;
\red0\green0\blue0;
\red0\green0\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue255;
\red0\green255\blue0;
\red255\green0\blue255;
\red255\green0\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue0;
\red255\green255\blue255;
\red0\green0\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue128;
\red0\green128\blue0;
\red128\green0\blue128;
\red128\green0\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue0;
\red128\green128\blue128;
\red192\green192\blue192;
\red239\green219\blue197;
\red205\green149\blue117;
\red253\green217\blue181;
\red120\green219\blue226;
\red135\green169\blue107;
\red255\green164\blue116;
\red250\green231\blue181;
\red159\green129\blue112;
\red253\green124\blue110;
\red35\green35\blue35;
\red31\green117\blue254;
\red173\green173\blue214;
\red25\green158\blue189;
\red115\green102\blue189;
\red222\green93\blue131;
\red203\green65\blue84;
\red180\green103\blue77;
\red255\green127\blue73;
\red234\green126\blue93;
\red176\green183\blue198;
\red255\green255\blue153;
\red28\green211\blue162;
\red255\green170\blue204;
\red221\green68\blue146;
\red29\green172\blue214;
\red188\green93\blue88;
\red221\green148\blue117;
\red154\green206\blue235;
\red255\green188\blue217;
\red253\green219\blue109;
\red43\green108\blue196;
\red239\green205\blue184;
\red110\green81\blue96;
\red29\green249\blue20;
\red113\green188\blue120;
\red109\green174\blue129;
\red195\green100\blue197;
\red204\green102\blue102;
\red231\green198\blue151;
\red252\green217\blue117;
\red168\green228\blue160;
\red149\green145\blue140;
\red28\green172\blue120;
\red240\green232\blue145;
\red255\green29\blue206;
\red178\green236\blue93;
\red93\green118\blue203;
\red202\green55\blue103;
\red59\green176\blue143;
\red253\green252\blue116;
\red252\green180\blue213;
\red255\green189\blue136;
\red246\green100\blue175;
\red205\green74\blue74;
\red151\green154\blue170;
\red255\green130\blue67;
\red200\green56\blue90;
\red239\green152\blue170;
\red253\green188\blue180;
\red26\green72\blue118;
\red48\green186\blue143;
\red25\green116\blue210;
\red255\green163\blue67;
\red186\green184\blue108;
\red255\green117\blue56;
\red230\green168\blue215;
\red65\green74\blue76;
\red255\green110\blue74;
\red28\green169\blue201;
\red255\green207\blue171;
\red197\green208\blue230;
\red253\green215\blue228;
\red21\green128\blue120;
\red252\green116\blue253;
\red247\green128\blue161;
\red142\green69\blue133;
\red116\green66\blue200;
\red157\green129\blue186;
\red255\green29\blue206;
\red255\green73\blue108;
\red214\green138\blue89;
\red255\green72\blue208;
\red227\green37\blue107;
\red238\green32\blue77;
\red255\green83\blue73;
\red192\green68\blue143;
\red31\green206\blue203;
\red120\green81\blue169;
\red255\green155\blue170;
\red252\green40\blue71;
\red118\green255\blue122;
\red159\green226\blue191;
\red165\green105\blue79;
\red138\green121\blue93;
\red69\green206\blue162;
\red251\green126\blue253;
\red205\green197\blue194;
\red128\green218\blue235;
\red236\green234\blue190;
\red255\green207\blue72;
\red253\green94\blue83;
\red250\green167\blue108;
\red252\green137\blue172;
\red219\green215\blue210;
\red23\green128\blue109;
\red222\green170\blue136;
\red119\green221\blue231;
\red253\green252\blue116;
\red146\green110\blue174;
\red247\green83\blue148;
\red255\green160\blue137;
\red143\green80\blue157;
\red237\green237\blue237;
\red162\green173\blue208;
\red255\green67\blue164;
\red252\green108\blue133;
\red205\green164\blue222;
\red252\green232\blue131;
\red197\green227\blue132;
\red255\green182\blue83;
}
{\stylesheet
{\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs24 \snext0 Normal;}
{\cs10 \additive\ssemihidden Default Paragraph Font;}
{\s1\qc\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 Part;}
{\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 1;}
{\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 2;}
{\s4\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 3;}
{\s5\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 4;}
{\s6\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 5;}
{\s7\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 heading 6;}
{\s8\qr\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext8 rightpar;}
{\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext9 centerpar;}
{\s10\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext10 leftpar;}
{\s11\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equation;}
{\s12\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationNum;}
{\s13\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlign;}
{\s14\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationAlignNum;}
{\s15\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArray;}
{\s16\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 equationArrayNum;}
{\s17\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 theorem;}
{\s18\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 bitmapCenter;}
{\s20\qc\sb240\sa240\b\f0\fs36 \sbasedon0\snext21 Title;}
{\s21\qc\sa120\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 author;}
{\s22\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext22 footer;}
{\s23\ql\tqc\tx4536\tqr\tx9072\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext23 header;}
{\s30\ql\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 caption;}
{\s31\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 Figure;}
{\s32\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext32 Table;}
{\s33\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext33 Tabular;}
{\s34\qc\sb120\sa0\keep\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext34 Tabbing;}
{\s35\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext35 Quote;}
{\s38\ql\widctlpar\f3\fs24 \snext38 verbatim;}
{\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext46 List;}
{\s47\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext47 List 1;}
{\s50\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 latex picture;}
{\s51\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0 \sbasedon0\snext0 subfigure;}
{\s61\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibheading;}
{\s62\ql\fi-567\li567\sb0\sa0\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext62 bibitem;}
{\s64\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext64 endnotes;}
{\s65\ql\fi-113\li397\lin397\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext65 footnote text;}
{\s66\qj\fi-170\li454\lin454\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext66 endnote text;}
{\cs62\super \additive\sbasedon10 footnote reference;}
{\cs63\super \additive\sbasedon10 endnote reference;}
{\s67\ql\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext67 acronym;}
{\s70\qc\sa120\b\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext71 abstract title;}
{\s71\qj\li1024\ri1024\fi340\widctlpar\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext0 abstract;}
{\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs20 \sbasedon0\snext0 contents_heading;}
{\s81\ql\li425\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb240\sa60\keepn\f0\fs24\b \sbasedon0\snext82 toc 1;}
{\s82\ql\li512\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext83 toc 2;}
{\s83\ql\li1024\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext84 toc 3;}
{\s84\ql\li1536\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext85 toc 4;}
{\s85\ql\li2048\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 5;}
{\s86\ql\li2560\tqr\tldot\tx8222\sb60\sa60\keepn\f0\fs24 \sbasedon0\snext86 toc 6;}
}
{\info
{\title Original file was USthesis_Masters.tex}
{\doccomm Created using latex2rtf 2.3.16 r1254 (released May 12 2017) on Tue Aug 22 12:56:11 2017
}
}
{\footer\pard\plain\f0\fs24\qc\chpgn\par}
\paperw11960\paperh16900\margl2060\margr2100\margt2520\margb1940\pgnstart0\widowctrl\qj\ftnbj\f0\aftnnar
{\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \fs20 {UScrest-WM} \par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 \fs20 {2017/09/09} \par
{\page
\pard\plain\s70\qc\sa120\b\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 \fs20 Abstract\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \li1024\ri1024\fi360 \fs20 [english]Add abstract. \par
}{\pard\plain\s70\qc\sa120\b\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi360 \fs20 Abstract\par
\pard\plain\s0\qj\widctlpar\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \li1024\ri1024\fi360 \fs20 [afrikaans]Voeg uittreksel by. \par
}\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi0 \fs20 Chapter 1\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Acknowledgements\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 I would like to express my sincere gratitude to the following people and organisations ...\par
\page
\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Chapter 2\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Dedications\par
\par \pard {\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 \qc [Sorry. Ignored {\plain\f3\\begin\{Afr\} ... \\end\{Afr\}}]\par
}\par \pard \page
\pard\plain\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \fi0  Contents\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \par
{\field{\*\fldinst TOC \\o "1-3" }{\fldrslt }}
\page
\pard\plain\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0  List of Figures\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \par
{\field{\*\fldinst TOC \\f f }{\fldrslt }}
\page
\pard\plain\s80\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0  List of Tables\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 \par
{\field{\*\fldinst TOC \\f t }{\fldrslt }}
\page
\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 Chapter 3\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Nomenclature\par
{\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 \qc [Sorry. Ignored {\plain\f3\\begin\{Nomencl\} ... \\end\{Nomencl\}}]\par
}\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 {subsubsection}\par
\page
\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Chapter {\*\bkmkstart BMchp_Introduction}4{\*\bkmkend BMchp_Introduction}\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Introduction\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 This thesis reports on a project undertaken in die biomedical field of wearable electronics. Great advances in the miniaturization of electronics and wireless communication have challenged and transformed the norm of how we use electronics to listen to the language of our bodies.\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi360 This project revolves around the continuous measurement of vital signs. These signs are objective parameters that give an indication of physical well-being and the state of essential physiological functions. For example, infections are indicated by a rise in core temperature {FluOrCold}, pneumonia can be detected by a shortness of breath {MayoPneumonia}, an abnormal decrease in blood oxygen saturation during sleep can be a warning sign for sudden infant death syndrome {thach2008tragic} and a rise in heart rate can indicate physical stress{StressAndHR}. These signs can be detected electronically before traditionally observable symptoms appear. In many cases, the deciding factor in the success of a treatment is whether the illness is detected early enough.\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi360 Because of this, the importance and usefulness of a continuous, wearable health monitor should not be underestimated. Access to accurate, long term data can lead to improved diagnosis of health issues and a better understanding of how our bodies react to drugs, exercise, emotions and the environment around us. Traditionally, vital sign monitoring is done with a stationary, dedicated device for each signal to be measured. Due to the many large, stationary equipment needed for traditional patient monitoring, it is obvious that this is not suitable for continuous and mobile vital sign monitoring.\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi360 This project concerns the design, development and evaluation of a proof of concept device that will overcome the limitations of these traditional methods. The device is to be worn in the ear like an earphone or hearing aid. It will make multi-parameter vital sign measurements and transmit collected data through a wireless connection to a supporting system for storage and analysis. In this project, the supporting system will be on a laptop, but it can also be on the smart-phone of the wearer or on a cloud server. This supporting system can be used by a physician, caretaker or the wearer self, to monitor and track his/her health.\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi360 From here onwards, this device will be referred to as the {\i Ear-Monitor}. This report will discuss the project aim and objectives, relevant literature and the design, manufacturing and testing of the Ear-Monitor.\par
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 1  Aim/Research Question\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 To develop and test a proof of concept wearable device that can monitor vital signs and transmit collected data wirelessly to a warning and storage system. Vital signs include core temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate and blood oxygen saturation.\par
{(\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 or in the form of a Research Question?)\par
}\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \fi360 Is the external ear canal a feasible location for the continuous monitoring of core temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate, blood oxygen and saturation by means of an ear worn device?\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi360 In order to achieve the aim of of this project the following three objectives have to be met: {\par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Develop a device to measure core temperature, heart rate, respiratory rate and blood oxygen saturation through the external ear of the wearer. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Conduct a trial experiment to determine the functionality of this device. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Subsequently, evaluate the feasibility of an ear worn vital sign monitor \par
}\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb300 \fi0 2  Motivation\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 This project originated from a need found in medical practice and expressed by the proposer/advocate of this topic. It is the need for better vital sign monitoring methods for neonates and infants in hospital nurseries and at home. High-risk patients are placed in ICUs and are thoroughly monitored, whereas lower risk patients are left in the nursery or sent home {barfield2012american}. These patients are poorly monitored while at a fragile age, increasing the risk of health issues. Insufficient health monitoring for neonates and infants is due to the lack of a practical monitoring method. The solution to this issue is the development of an unobtrusive, wearable health monitor.\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb120 \fi360 While contemplating and researching this idea, it was found that a much larger group can benefit from such a device. This lead to the project pivoting toward a more general purpose vital sign monitoring device. This device will prove if it is practical to measure the mentioned vital signs through the external ear canal. If this proof of concept is successful, the methods developed during this project can be used to develop specialized ear-worn devices for various applications. In practice, such a device can transmit health statistics and warnings in real time to a physician or caretaker. Applications include:\par
{\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Monitoring neonate- and infant health in nurseries and at home. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Monitoring health of patients with chronic illnesses. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Studying the effect of prescription drugs or other treatments. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Monitoring the health of people working under strenuous conditions like heavy machinery operators and soldiers. \par
\pard\plain\s46\ql\fi-283\li283\lin283\sb0\sa120\widctlpar\tql\tx283\f0\fs24\sl240\slmult1 \sb50 \li600\fi-300 \bullet\tab
Tracking the health and fitness of athletes. \par
}\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi360 The ear was chosen as location for various reasons. Firstly, the anatomy of the ear and the proximity of an ear-worn device to the tympanic membrane, means that al the mentioned vital signs mentioned can theoretically be measured from this location. This eliminates the need for multiple devices or the need for wires connecting sensors on different parts of the body. The absence of sensors on traditional locations such as the chest or limbs and the absence of connective wires mean that the ear-worn device is minimally obstructive for the wearer, especially through freeing up the hands and allowing free movement. Secondly,the shape of the external ear is ideal for supporting a device without the need for straps or adhesives. Furthermore, the head remains relatively still in relation to the rest of the body. This reduces the risk of motion artefacts corrupting the signals of interest. An ear-worn device can be embedded in the already familiar shape of a earphone or hearing aid. The final motivation for using the ear as location for the health monitor is its novelty. As will be apparent from Chapter {\field{\*\fldinst{\lang1024 REF BMchp_LiteratureReview \\* MERGEFORMAT }}{\fldrslt{@TitleReference {2}{Literature Review}}}} of this document, there is opportunity for research to be done in the unsaturated field of ear-worn health monitors.\par
\page
\pard\plain\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \fi0 Chapter {\*\bkmkstart BMchp_LiteratureReview}5{\*\bkmkend BMchp_LiteratureReview}\par
\pard\plain\s2\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs40\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 Literature Review\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 This chapter aims to describe the biological context within which the project is undertaken. An overview of the anatomy of the ear, which is relevant to this study, will be given. Thereafter, background will be given of the physiology of each of the four vital signs. Finally, the technology relevant to the measurement of each vital sign required of the Ear-Monitor will be discussed in therms of theory and the work done by others.\par
\pard\plain\s3\ql\sb240\sa120\keepn\f0\b\fs32\sl240\slmult1 \sb240 \fi0 1  Ear Anatomy\par
\pard\plain\s9\qc\sb120\sa120\keep\widctlpar\f0\sl240\slmult1 \sb60 \fi0 The area that is available for the Ear-Monitor to make the vital sign measurements is the external ear. It includes the auricle, ear canal with surrounding tissue and the lateral side of the tympanum. Each part of the ear anatomy will be discussed, especially with regards to its ability to emit information related to vital signs or to support the device in another way.\par
